Dear Editor, 

We are pleased to submit our manuscript "A weakly structured stem for human origins in Africa" for publication. 
Many genetic studies have recently transformed our view of early human history using genetic data to identify unexpected patterns in our history. 
However, studies that have looked at early human history share important limitations. They typically rely on very limited data, focus on very specific aspects of
genetic diversity to infer past events, and only consider a narrow range of possible models to explain these data.

In this manuscript, we introduce 84 new whole genomes from the Nama, a south African population that is deeply diverged from most other modern groups. 
Using a recently developed approach that allows testing a wide range of competing models from the anthropological and genetics literature,  ...


Our analyses strongly 
support a model involving weak population structure in humans dating back to a million years ago. This is in stark contrast to
models currently favoured among geneticists, which feature a single recent ancestral population with archaic contributions in Africa. 
In particular, it excludes many fossil remains as representing branches that contributed appreciably to modern humans.

TDW COMMENT: I think that saying that our model excludes "many" fossils are representing branches that contributed to present-day humans is an overstatement without more analyses. I would emphasize that our approach allows us to make predictions about the fossils record and morphologically divergent fossils were unlikely to represent branches that contributed. Also, there is no mention of the finding that contemporary human population structure in Africa only goes back to 120-135ka. For a Nature cover letter, I would make two clear points about the results: 1) our model is very different from currently popular models in that contemporary human population structure in Africa is fairly shallow and there was a weakly structured stem instead of archaic hominin admixture; and 2) our model can be related to the fossil record and it predicts that morphologically divergent fossils were unlikely to represent branches that contributed.

Because our analysis provides detailed quantitative  
models of human evolution, we were able to test it against a broader range of 
genetic and paleoanthropological information than qualitative models typically inferred using ancient genomes. 
We show that the weakly structured stem models outperform previously proposed models
in predicting a wide array of diversity patterns that had been previously attributed to archaic admixture. 
We also find that it better aligns with the archaelogical records, in that [...]

Our manuscript thus establishes a weakly structured stem model as the best-supported model to understand human
 origins and to describe genomic data.  

Sincerely, 

The authors.            

 
 


